[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I like to say my rebirth as
an ultra marathoner started--
it was fueled by bad tequila.
I was in a nightclub
on my 30th birthday
doing what we do on
our 30th birthday.
I was getting drunk
with my buddies.
And 11 o'clock at night,
I had a midlife crisis,
an epiphany if you will.
And I said, I don't like the
course my life is going down,
and I'm going to
change it right now.
I'm going to become
a runner again.
I used to love to
run when I was a kid,
but I hadn't run
in over a decade.
So I left the nightclub.
I walked out of the bar, 11
o'clock at night, and said,
I'm leaving.
I'm running 30 miles right now.
Three sheets to the
wind, I just took off,
started running south
from San Francisco.
I knew if I made it
to a town called Half
Moon Bay, that
was 30 miles away.
And about 15 miles
into it, I sobered up
and I thought, what
the hell am I doing?
This is wrong.
This is absurd.
But it just felt
right, so I kept going.
And that night forever changed
the direction of my life.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I'm a prolific
runner, and I love
running in extreme
conditions as well as
running extreme distances.
So I've run across Death
Valley in the middle of summer,
where it's over 130
degrees Fahrenheit.
I've run a marathon
to the South Pole.
I've run across the Gobi,
across the Atacama Desert.
I've run on all seven
continents twice now.
So I've seen just about every
piece of Earth you could see.
I ran across Haiti
earlier this year.
Just a couple months ago, I ran
across the ancient Silk Road,
from Uzbekistan to Kyrgyzstan
to Kazakhstan-- so wild stretch
of the Silk Road.
Yeah.
So I ran--
I wanted to run a marathon
every state of the union.
And my kids only had 50
days off for summer break,
so I had to do
them repetitively.
So yeah, 50 marathons, 50
states, 50 consecutive days.
Yeah, we had a
big converted bus.
And my kids traveled with me.
My mom is a retired
schoolteacher,
so she road schooled the kids
as we were driving around.
And we drove from
state to state.
And when we got to the west
coast, I flew to Hawaii.
From Hawaii, flew to Alaska.
From Alaska, flew to Seattle,
and then got back in the bus.
Well, I pretty much followed
the prescription for happiness.
We're told if we go to good
college, get a good degree--
I went to graduate school.
I got a business degree, an MBA.
I had a cushy corporate
job with all the perks.
I had stock options,
company car.
These things are supposed
to bring you happiness.
And I thought that would
be the case with me,
and I wasn't happy.
I was young, I was successful,
and I was miserable.
I didn't like being
a business guy.
It wasn't who I was.
And I just saw
that I would either
pursue a life of
quiet desperation,
or I would do what I
really wanted to do,
and that was exploration and
run and just see the world.
And I had no idea how I was
going to pay for it all,
but I thought, you know, it
just feels better doing this.
So that's the impetus
that got me going.
Yeah.
I think that we've become so
comfortable, we're miserable.
We thought if we were
comfortable, we'd be happy,
and we're over-convenienced.
There's no struggle.
There's no hardship in our life.
Everything comes easy.
And I find that I'm never
more fulfilled and more
alive than when I'm really
struggling, especially
during a long, really
difficult race.
I like to say there's
magic in misery.
So pursuing a lofty goal
and groveling is magic.
It's unlike anything that
modern day living provides,
any sort of comfort, any
sort of material thing.
They don't bring the same sort
of joy, not the same level
of fulfillment.
For me, running and
physical endurance
is the way I manifest
that striving
to be the best that I can be,
to reach my, as the Greeks say,
the arete, the perfect alignment
of mind, body, and spirit.
So other people can
achieve their bestness
through following
their own passion.
Running isn't for everyone.
I like to tell
people, if it's basket
weaving you love, throw
your heart and your passion
into basket weaving, and
you'll make a go of it.
People are like,
how am I ever going
to make a living doing this?
It's ridiculous.
You'll figure out
a way if you follow
what you are truly happy about.
And I tell people,
script your perfect life.
Just take a pen and
a sheet of paper,
not a computer, and just
freeform, in one paragraph,
describe what your day
would look like if you
were living the perfect life.
Dream.
Make it outrageous.
Just what would it look like?
Some people are surprised
because they think,
oh, great house right
on the beach, that's
what would bring me happiness.
And they start to write this.
They think, God, I'd be
doing charity work in India.
That would really move my heart.
So I tell people to do that.
And then you have a blueprint
of where you want to go.
Because unless you know
where you want to go,
you're never going to get there.
So that's the way I tell people
to find their calling in life.
I think the biggest drawback,
the biggest hurdle to people
doing what they love is fear.
They fear the unknown.
And let's face it, it's scary.
It was really scary
for me to tell my wife,
I'm going to leave my job.
We had-- I had my
young daughter.
We had health care.
Like I say, we had a
401(k) matching program,
all these perks, a paycheck.
I'm going to walk away
from all these things.
That's a scary transition.
And not everyone is willing
to trust in themselves
to that level.
And I think that holds
a lot of people captive.
And it's too bad, it really is.
Because it's better, I
think, to fail boldly
than not to try at all.
I think to identify your fears,
you really need to look inward.
And that requires
quiet reflection,
which is hard to find
in our modern day.
You're constantly bombarded
with noise and distraction.
So I always tell
people, go for a walk.
Or if you like to run,
go for a long run.
And really say, what
is holding me back?
Where do I want to
go, and why am I
not moving in that direction?
What are these barriers
that are getting in my way?
And I think a lot of
it is just convenience.
I think people don't want to
move outside their comfort
zone, and that can be a trap.
So for me, running was
very symbolic of life,
because you're forced to move
outside of your comfort zone.
You're forced to
confront failure.
see how willing you
are to push through adversity.
And that's why I think
running is a great lesson that
transcends the sport of running
into broader life things.
I think that we're
all interconnected.
And to contribute your utmost
to society, to humanity,
I think you need
to pursue what it
is that's uniquely within you.
And I just think that that is
the best course for humanity.
If everyone was to do
that, I think the world
would be a happier place.
I studied food science when
I was in graduate school,
so I could expound for a long
time about the food industry.
I think we've gotten
away from the Earth.
I've gone full circle
with my particular diet.
I've self-selected
the foods that
seem to give me more energy
versus those that would leave
me lethargic and dragging.
And I found that I ate only
things that a caveman would
have eaten, anything I
can pick from a tree,
dig from the Earth, catch with
my hands as far as game goes.
So I've gone to foods that
are unprocessed and unrefined.
I think we need to look at
less engineering in our food
and focus more on how do
we sustain agriculture
and eating from the land
and better mechanisms
for doing that.
I don't think I'm
alone in this belief.
I think that a lot of people
are realizing this as well.
There's a mentor I
have here in America.
His name's Jack LaLanne.
He's a fitness guy.
And he used to say, if man
makes it, don't eat it,
and if it tastes
good, spit it out.
Yeah, Jack.
Yeah.
So my diet, if you had
to take a genres of diet,
it's kind of a hybrid between
a paleo, a Mediterranean,
and raw.
I really don't cook
my food much at all.
Luckily, living here
in northern California,
I eat a lot of wild Pacific
salmon, almost sushi grade.
So lot of uncooked, raw foods.
Yeah.
So as an ultra-marathoner
that's run
across a lot of different
deserts in the world,
hydration is really important.
And I've experimented with
just about everything.
What I've come to is coconut
water, just unsweetened,
usually raw organic
coconut water.
And I've been
drinking coconut water
for about the past decade.
It's kind of in vogue now.
You hear a lot about coconut
water brands and such.
I don't really like coconut
water just day-to-day.
But if I'm in need of
hydration, coconut water
seems to work better
than anything.
So people ask me if I
meditate, and I really don't.
I do yoga, but I do what's
called Bikram Yogra or Bikram
Yoga-- hot yoga.
So I do that more just for
stretching, not for any sort
of therapeutic value.
Running is my therapy.
And I think a lot of people
run for that very reason.
I work through so many
problems when I'm running,
and I get to look inward.
And it's my quiet time
to think for myself.
I have no distractions.
I can think whatever I want.
And actually, I'm an
author as well, a writer,
and I do a lot of my
writing while I'm running.
I carry a digital recorder.
Actually, I use my iPhone now.
And I just dictate a lot
of passages as I'm running.
Then, when I'm on flights
across the country,
I just type up my notes.
And that's how I've
written a lot of my books.
But when you're
running, you're either
super bored-- which it happens
a lot, which I think is fine.
Actually, I think
it's fine for people
to be bored because
I don't think
people spend enough time
being bored these days.
I think everyone's
like, we can't be bored.
This is bad.
Let's change it.
I think boredom is--
it's kind of the
yin and the yang.
I think we need to balance the
chaos in most of our lives.
People do think I'm crazy.
But it's amazing when
I run down the street
how many people recognize me.
And they-- I don't know.
Running, it's bizarre
how it inspires people,
because it's such a simple act.
But when I run marathons--
like I'm running New York City
Marathon in a couple of weeks.
And there's just
millions of spectators,
and they're so happy.
And they're not running.
You're just like, why?
You just wonder, why are these
people so fired up and inspired
watching someone half dead?
But there's something that--
there's some human
thing, there's some bond.
When you see someone
suffering, you immediately
unite with them somehow.
I don't know what it is.
Yeah, it's deep, and I think
we really understand it.
But I think it goes beyond
just cheering someone
to the finish line.
With running, I think
visualization, as far
as your craft, is a
little bit less important.
I know a lot of athletes that
visualize crossing the finish
line, and I think that
can be a powerful impetus
to get you going.
But I think it's
more the seeds that
are planted when you're young.
There's always some inflection
point where you see something.
Novak had an early
experience that changed him.
Something sparked
in his personality
when he saw this gentleman
win Wimbledon on television.
Something about it-- it
could have been anything.
He could have just--
the sweat coming off his head.
Just something, some trigger
in this little boy got ignited,
and it turned into--
wow-- an incredible fire.
So with me, I just remember
when I was a little boy--
I'm Greek, 100% Greek-- going
to these Greek festivals
for Easter-- and
Easter is a big party,
a big celebration
in Greek tradition--
and watching these
men, these 70-,
these 80-year-old men that
would dance non-stop all day.
They'd drink ouzo and they'd
get back out on the dance floor.
And something about
their endurance--
they just all day
long were dancing.
And I just thought, how do
they have that kind of stamina?
This idea of just going all day
with anything stuck with me,
and it just manifested
in running, I think.
We change over time.
What's important to me now
was probably not so important
when I was a teenager.
And I think that
learning new skills
and taking on new
challenges is something
that really ignites a passion.
So I always encourage people,
try something different.
And running-- again,
I'm going to go back
to writing because
it's so symbolic.
A lot of people don't run.
And I say, sign up for a 5K.
Make a goal of running a 5K.
It's approachable.
It's not as difficult as
learning a new language
or something.
It's more a discipline sort
of thing, a mental discipline.
But it'll break down
barriers, and it'll
get you to look at
yourself and to analyze
and to think differently.
So I get asked a lot, like,
who are your inspirations?
And I look to everyday
people that inspire me.
I certainly have
heroes, and these people
are larger than life.
You don't really know what
their personality is like.
Think about Steve
Jobs, for instance.
I kind of idolized the guy.
And then, the more I
learned about who he really
was, I thought, there's
some qualities there
that I'm not so crazy about.
But my wife is my hero,
because I know her intimately,
and she's just got a good soul.
She is-- she's beautiful,
just naturally.
And you see the flaws
in someone when you
live with them for 30 years.
My dad is a great hero of mine.
And for better or
for worse, he's
just always been there for me.
Even when I didn't want him
there for me, he was there.
And he's always got my back, and
I really admire him for that.
So it's the everyday hero
that really inspires me.
The "why do you run" is a
complex, nuanced question.
Why does anyone run?
It makes no sense.
It hurts.
After you're done, it
makes you feel good,
but the act itself, you
don't want to do it.
It's painful.
Why are you drawn to it?
Why do you spend countless
hours on a trail by yourself?
Some of it is
certainly escapism.
I've got to be honest.
I'm a responsible
father and husband.
But these are
pressures that I'm not
sure we're engineered
as a species to endure.
It's hard for me.
I know I've got three people
that depend on me to make
a living, to earn money.
And sometimes I don't
want that burden.
And running, to me,
it provides a release
where I can just be free, it's
just my shoes and a trail.
I would say I'm a
spiritual person.
I'm not a religious
person, per se.
And there's a lot of
ancient Greek quotes
that I reflect on a lot.
There's one by a guy
named Aeschylus who said,
today is the tomorrow you
worried about yesterday.
So that speaks to stress.
And my dad always used to say,
it's not how many times you
get knocked down
that matters, it's
how many times you get back up.
So I really like that one too.